[music]
>> This looks like quite a crazy pastime.
They really want to do something that is
right at the very brink of what's
humanly possible.
Oh my goodness.
My name is Professor Hannah Fry,
a mathematician and writer with a
lifelong habit following my curiosity.
Especially when things are deeply,
deliciously interesting.
Teaching yoga for you.
Dionysus would have approved.
Some people travel to see the world.
I travel to question the forces that
[music] shape entire nations. Welcome to
South Korea. I wanted to come here for
their optimal urban planning.
It all feels quite chaotic, I'll be
honest with you.
I want to meet the people with
unexpected [music] stories to tell. I
cannot imagine going through that as a
young boy. No.
And dig up the peculiar and wonderful
treasures [music] that reveal what a
country is made of.
I'm looking at it and thinking, what
beautiful geometry.
This is my [music] way to make sense of
what makes our world go round.
Spain is the second most visited country
in the entire world.
And it's easy to see why. It's got
beautiful beaches, spectacular
landscapes, a long, rich history,
good food and wine,
and just to show off, beautiful weather,
too.
You can see why 94 million tourists
visit each year.
I'm beginning my journey in the heart of
the country, the capital, Madrid.
It's not the Spain of the glossy
brochures that has drawn me here. It's a
conundrum, because when you think about
it, at least to me, anyway, there is
[music] something strange going on.
On the one hand, this country exudes an
unhurried charm.
And yet, on the other hand, the Spanish
are known for their fiery passion and
commitment to total excellence.
This is a place that has gone out and
explored the entire world and spread
their language across a vast global
empire. And yet, within the country,
they don't have one main language, they
have four and loads of other dialects.
So, the question is, how can one place
manage [music] to be so spectacularly at
odds with itself?
And what better [music] way to
investigate first something that is
quintessentially Spanish and yet began
with those cast [music] out from
society.
>> [music]
>> Flamenco was born around 300 years ago
against a backdrop of hardship, exile,
and resistance.
It was created by Roma, Jews, and Arabs
who'd been pushed to the margins by the
Christian rulers.
But somehow, through the persecution,
they found solidarity
and made something defiant, raw,
and bafflingly complex.
>> [singing]
[music]
[music and singing]
[applause and music]
[music]
>> In the beginning, I kind of wanted to
tap along, like, you know, tap my feet
to the same rhythm. It's impossible. You
cannot keep up with this rhythm.
She's like this strong, sexy character.
And then the guy comes on and he's like
dripping with passion and emotion, and
the whole thing is totally mesmerizing.
And at the same time, they are
unimaginably precise and in sync with
one another.
Now, that is a contradiction I want to
get my head and my feet around.
I think if you're really going to
understand flamenco, you've got to have
a lesson in it. And um and that's why
I've come here. Where I'm told I can
find one of the most renowned flamenco
teachers [music] in all Spain.
La Truco has been teaching and
performing flamenco for over 30 years.
She has kindly agreed to show me the
basics.
Along with her colleague and sometime
dance partner, Adrian.
She's going to use, okay, the 12 beats
rhythm, okay? Which is the one we use
the most in flamenco, okay? Actually,
it's only flamenco it it exists, okay?
12 beats. 1 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2.
Actually, when we say 1 2
>> [laughter]
>> Hannah, When we say
IT'S NOT DIFFICULT.
>> [laughter]
[screaming]
>> ONE OF THE REASONS IT'S SO TRICKY is
that most dances follow an eight-beat
rhythm, not 12.
Then, to complicate things further,
flamenco doesn't follow a steady beat,
but shifting patterns of rhythm.
To help mark these complex rhythms,
there are hand claps,
guitar strums,
and arm movements, too. Here's Here's
what I've discovered about my body. I
can only think [music] or move, not
both.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah. I can't do both at the same It's
It's normal. That's flamenco.
>> [music]
>> But flamenco isn't just about drilled
choreography.
You are also expected to improvise.
For us it's like a way to show our our
feelings. It's just an excuse, actually.
It's an excuse. But to get to that point
must require like an insane level of
mastery. Yeah. Nobody said that this was
easier.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm sorry, but it is
It is like that, yes. Is it quite a
Spanish thing to like value precision
and difficulty? That For me, that's the
art. Yeah? To give the idea that
something difficult it's easy.
For me, that's the point. Mhm. The
beauty in making something difficult
look easy. Absolutely.
Another contradiction, but that is the
whole point. What really matters in
flamenco is when precision collides with
improvisation, creating a state of
ecstasy known as duende.
In flamenco, we use that word when you
can't explain, you just say, duende.
There's duende there.
Normally, it happens when we are
improvising. You play by ear and you
just
>> [singing]
>> Okay, clearly, there is nothing magical
about my flamenco.
But I can't help but be totally charmed
by this art form.
It's this strange blend of discipline
and wild abandon,
simultaneously a dance of deep sadness
and anger and flirtatious joy.
It's telling that this once marginal art
form has come to represent Spain.
But Spain is much more than a single
[music] nation.
It is a collection of 17 autonomous
regions that very much do their own
thing with their own laws and
parliaments and presidents.
And to dig deeper into this [music]
tension, I'm heading out of the capital
to see how the inhabitants of one of the
country's most fiercely proud regions
reconcile their competing identities,
if indeed they do.
>> Spain is a country known for its
distinct regional cultures.
Local languages, [music]
traditions, and political independence
are not just celebrated here, they are
intensely protected.
But why has the country developed this
way?
Time for a little map work.
>> [music]
>> If there's one thing that you need to
know about the geography of Spain, is
that this is an incredibly mountainous
country.
In fact, with eight major mountain
ranges, it is the second most
mountainous country in [music] Europe.
These mountains are actually extremely
important to the history of why Spain
[music] is the way that it is. And
that's because mountains are excellent
at stopping things.
Things like big clouds full of rain.
If you've got warm,
wet air coming in from over [music] an
ocean, a mountain will make it kick up
towards the sky, cooling it down, which
means that the water will all condense
[music] into rain clouds, and then you
get lots of rain right near the coast,
but it means that all the water is sort
of used up by the time [music] you get
further inland.
This is known as the rain shadow effect.
The result is that much of the inland is
dry [music] shrubland, while all along
the coastline, you are blessed with
these lush green landscapes. You can see
that along here. If you look over here,
this is known as green [music] Spain,
very green all the way along the coast.
And it's not only rain that's had a hard
time getting into Spain.
Mountains, they're quite hard to cross,
extremely difficult to set up trade
routes or people routes through a
mountain range.
Conveniently, they are also a nightmare
for anyone trying [music] to invade. So,
the Romans, who
don't know if you've heard about this,
but were quite good at conquering, took
200 years to manage to conquer this
Iberian Peninsula. [music]
And when the Arab and Berber armies came
up from North Africa to invade some 600
years later,
>> [music]
>> the mountainous region to the north
stayed stubbornly unconquered. The
terrain [music] didn't just make it hard
for outsiders.
The different regions,
>> [music]
>> largely isolated from one another and
constantly fighting amongst themselves,
developed their own distinct identities.
And so, Spain, effectively, is this
collection of pockets of people that
have united for one country. It's the
reason why people say [music] that Spain
is a country despite its geography,
rather than because [music] of it.
With that contradictory idea in mind,
I'm heading to one of those regions,
which, thanks to its proximity, was once
under the control of those invaders from
North Africa.
I want to find out how this twist of
geography helped shape the independent
spirit [music] the region is known for
today.
This is Valencia.
One of Spain's oldest cities, now its
third largest.
Part of its success is due to a vast,
fertile ring of farmland that surrounds
the city.
It's so prized that it even has its own
name, La Huerta, meaning the orchard.
This area of over 100 square kilometers
is one of the most productive in Spain,
[music]
growing everything from oranges to
onions, artichokes to peaches.
But the crazy thing is, none of these
crops are actually native [music] to
Spain.
And there is one crop that really
shouldn't be here,
even though Juan Valero's [music] family
has been merrily growing it for
generations.
>> [music]
>> Rice.
You see, rice is notoriously thirsty,
and much of this region is pretty arid.
So, how is this contradiction resolved?
Here, this is a channel to irrigate the
rice fields. So, where does the water
come from? From the lagoon, from the
Albufera lake.
1 km from here, we open [music] some
gates, and the water goes in the through
the channels. And then the water level
here rises?
>> Yes, and goes in the fields.
This is part of a much larger irrigation
system, parts of which have been [music]
operating for centuries, making use of
the area's two main rivers.
Gravity funnels water from [music] these
into a maze of smaller channels.
Then a series of sluice gates cycle
[music] water through the system,
distributing the liquid gold to Juan's
fields and thousands [music] of other
plots, from farming giants to tiny small
holdings.
It is incredibly efficient. Even in
times of drought, these fields are some
of the most productive in Spain.
In fact, this irrigation system, very
simple in reality, was designed
and constructed, the original system,
from the Muslims. Coming up from North
Africa. So, this is like well over a
thousand years ago that they started
building these channels. I mean, you'd
think now,
21st century, there would be a new idea.
Well, it's very good design.
So good, in fact, that the irrigation
helps produce not just enough food to
feed the city, but around 90% [music]
of Spain's entire rice output. And the
rice [music] was introduced in Europe
through Valencia. That's why we have the
paella.
>> [music]
>> I think it's fair to say that this rice
and tomato-based meal, seasoned with
paprika and saffron, is generally
regarded as the national dish.
But this is Spain, so of course things
aren't straightforward.
The recipe, I'm told, is a deeply
sensitive issue.
Juan has offered [music] to make lunch.
He has sent me to the Mercado Central
with a very specific list of
ingredients.
And Marina from [music] our production
team has offered to translate.
Okay, tomatoes, tomatoes. Uh
Are these local tomatoes? Yes, what do
you want, dear? Uh I'm making a paella.
Well, no, this is for salad, this is for
for cooking now, for cooking this
paella. Oh, just the the clean, classic
ones.
You know what? If I was making a paella
at home, I would just improvise. I'd
like put in some peppers. No, no, no.
I'd put in some chorizo. No, not
chorizo. Only Valencia, only rabbit,
chicken, beans in rice. The chorizo is
forbidden. Whenever, like a foreigner
makes a paella with chorizo or something
like that, we don't say it's a paella,
we say it's rice with things.
>> Rice with things. Yes, rice with things.
And here. Thank you.
Thank you.
Beautiful. Thank you very much.
So, if that's the tomatoes, I'll also
need some beans.
And with no room for improvisation here,
let's make sure we get the right ones so
we don't offend the locals, shall we?
In paella. Paella. Paella.
Those ones?
Rochet? Okay. It has to be those ones.
Okay, would I be breaking the rules if I
did that one?
Not the same texture, this is more soft.
Oh, I mean, I genuinely could not tell
the difference.
If I served you a paella with this in
it, would you be like, you're
disgusting?
Oh, you're being generous. Okay,
I'm going to get the right ones.
My paella will now officially be within
the legal limits.
This is a woman that's passionate about
her beans.
It was yesterday on the plant, and it's
today here.
>> Amazing. I mean, good soil in Valencia,
I'll tell you that.
It's the best garden in Spain.
>> The best garden [music] in Spain.
With everything in the bag, I'm now
hungry for lunch, sure, but mostly to
discover why everyone is so finicky
about this recipe.
>> [music]
>> Back at the farm, my shopping is now
safely in the hands of Juan's friend,
Jose,
>> [music]
>> a man who knows his way around a paella,
or, as we call it in my household, a
frying pan.
So, [music] I've got some time on my
hands.
Quite a lot of time, as it turns out.
You never want to be rude when you go
around somebody's house for a meal, but
um
it is nearly 3:00, and lunch is still
not ready.
And I'm told that this is totally
standard in Spain. Lunch at 3:00 p.m.,
dinner at 10:00.
But this isn't just because we're in a
Mediterranean country, it has a lot to
do with which time zone Spain inhabits.
When you take a look at a map of Europe,
you can see that Spain is pretty much on
the same longitude as Britain, as
Portugal, as as Morocco, so you would
expect that it should be on the same
time zone. But instead, Spain is on
Central European Time, which puts it the
same time zone as the capital of Serbia,
Belgrade, which is 2 and 1/2 thousand
kilometers over to the east.
This oddity dates back to World War II
and a decision made by Spain's dictator,
General Francisco Franco.
It turns out, [music] in 1940, Franco
decided that he wanted to change the
time zone of Spain, to move it forward
by 1 hour, so that they could be in line
with the time zone in Nazi Germany.
>> [music]
>> That means that Spain has these very
late sunrises and these long late
evenings and that is a quirk that
continues to affect lunchtime in Spain
today.
Jose has put 2 hours of hard work and
love into the pan. So, lunch with
friends and family is now served.
>> [applause]
>> Very good. Oh, it smells amazing. Thank
you, Hannah, for being here with us
today. Thank you. Mm.
Beautiful wine. Beautiful wine.
>> Okay, in the tradition, it's to eat the
pa- the paella from the pan.
>> Okay. Okay? Oh, look at this.
So, did you put CHORIZO IN? NO.
>> [laughter]
>> SO, HOW DID THE RECIPE COME ABOUT IN THE
FIRST PLACE?
Long time ago, family friends meet
together and each one put in the paella
what
they grow, vegetables or chicken or
rabbit.
Even eels from the lagoon.
>> Yeah.
Thank you for not doing the eel version
[laughter] for me today. Okay. I
appreciate the rabbit. At some point and
there was hunger here and they put in
the rice whatever they had. Even mouses.
Ooh.
That's true. Mice, yeah. That's true.
Hang on. You were like this about
chorizo, but mice, fine.
>> [laughter]
>> Over time, the recipe has been adapted
as it spread across the country. Here we
eat the traditional one, but if you go
100 km away to the south, the paella is
different in in Alicante.
>> [music]
>> See. That means that we have like
different cultures, in some places
different languages, different
gastronomies. Or even the paella? Even
the paella.
Now, if they [music] are so faithful to
the local recipe, where do their
loyalties lie? Region or nation? Okay,
so then do you feel like you're
Valencian or do you feel Spanish? Okay,
I feel first of all Valencian and after
Spanish.
And you?
It's the same for you? Yeah. Same for
you?
Oh, that's so interesting.
How is it now in Spain, this kind of
balance between being unified as a
country and yet having your local pride?
It's always the same thing. You think
that you're talking about a plate of
food, but you're not.
Instead, it's a clue as to why Spain has
such contradictions.
A country of passionate regions forged
together under great national pride.
>> [music]
>> But as a nation, Spain's story doesn't
stop at its borders, not even close.
After all, the country became an
imperial power when it struck out to
conquer the globe.
Beginning with my next stop, a tiny
group of islands
>> [music]
>> where there's another head-scratcher.
Perched at the crossroads of Europe and
Africa, right on the edge of the
Atlantic Ocean, Spain was perfectly
placed to dominate the seas.
But before the golden galleons of
Spain's global empire,
their conquering started on a scatter of
islands 170 km off Africa's coast.
The Canary Islands are a volcanic
archipelago, once a Spanish colony, but
now one of the country's autonomous
regions.
I'm bypassing the tourist hotspot of
Tenerife [music] in favor of La Gomera
and its capital, San Sebastian.
The island is lush, it's mountainous and
frankly not in a hurry to do much.
But that does not mean that this is a
place of insignificance, [music] quite
the opposite, because this is the harbor
where Christopher Columbus set sail for
the Americas.
Now, you have to imagine this is the
late 1400s. As far as he is aware,
nobody has any idea [music] what lays
beyond that vast expanse of ocean
until 6th of September, 1492, [music]
when he loads up his ships with supplies
and sets sail into the blue.
About 5 weeks later, he turns up in the
modern-day Bahamas and I think it's fair
to say the world was never quite the
same again.
>> [music]
>> Columbus and the colonizers that
followed set out to conquer, trampling
indigenous culture [music] and replacing
it with their own.
And as they did, the Spanish language
wasn't just spoken, it was imposed.
And yet here in La Gomera, the very
place from which the Spanish language
was first spread around the globe, the
3,000-year-old
local lingo is [music] still thriving.
It's called Silbo Gomero and it was
likely first used by the island's
original settlers from North Africa.
But it's not so much a language of the
town square because it's [music] not
spoken.
It's whistled.
As you can imagine, I have questions.
Why in La Gomera would you get whistling
language? Why? Because of the mountains,
>> [music]
>> because of the distance.
Silbo Gomero teacher Rogelio has been
whistling for over 30 years.
The whistle goes quicker and farther
than your foot [music] and your voice. I
will call you. Okay. Ah, Hannah.
And I want you to send it 1 2 km.
Did you hear it echoing around? Yes,
yes. Squawk. If you send it and it will
go.
Back in the days before mobile phones,
it's easy to see how handy this would
have been. But there is a knack to it.
Let us take this this finger. We must
cover our teeth. So.
And put the finger inside. If you say
choo. Oh, right. Choose. Try to say
choose.
Choose. Look look look for look for.
Choo choo choo choo.
How many? Two. Two. Two. One of the
wait, vocal strings.
I know vocal strings, only air. Choo.
It's not easy.
Even with Rogelio's best efforts,
>> [snorts]
>> I'm never going to be a star whistler.
Okay.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm just literally spitting all over
myself.
I might have trouble speaking it, but I
am absolutely determined to understand
it. Each sound has his heights. Look.
The E in Spanish, E. Is that here? A A
O.
Is it just the vowels then? Is that Is
that all you're doing? You're just
saying the vowels and nothing else? We
have in the whistle language of La
Gomera only four consonants. Hannah,
please come to the kitchen. Listen.
I don't know. I feel like I'm tuning
[laughter] into it.
I feel like
WHEN WHEN YOU KNOW WHEN you know what we
are saying, you to understand, you must
think you need to do yoga. Okay. And you
like to do yoga at your
kitchen.
Teaching yoga for you.
>> Yes.
>> [laughter]
>> Well, okay. So, what's really
interesting though is that like I can I
sort of feel like I can hear it now. But
can you just pick up this whistle
technique and just apply it to any other
language?
>> Any other language.
It's this brilliantly adaptive nature of
Silbo, the ability for it to be used in
any language, [music] that has kept it
alive.
Today, all the islanders are taught the
technique [music] in school and use it
to speak Castilian Spanish.
But for the next part of my lesson,
we're sticking with English.
Dudiane, who grew up using Silbo, has
taken me a kilometer down the road to
see if we can pick up and [music]
decipher any of Rogelio's messages.
They are far from the floor.
I don't know what that means. [laughter]
My comprehension is not quite there yet,
but it's not an issue of volume.
Skilled whistlers like Rogelio can reach
up to 120 decibels, which is louder than
a car horn.
It is above the pitch of most ambient
noise because whistling is
>> [music]
>> sound energy in a higher and narrower
frequency
and it carries 10 times farther than
shouting. Three words.
Touch.
Touch your
your nose. Touch your nose.
>> [snorts]
>> Thank you, everybody, and see you later.
>> [laughter]
>> Amazing.
Silbo has gone from a survival tool to a
source of real regional pride, [music]
understood by nearly all 22,000 locals.
I actually think there's [music]
something really beautifully poetic
about the story of La Gomera.
>> [music]
>> Because you have here
this ancient skill developed by the
original [music] inhabitants of this
island who really understood how to work
with their [music] landscape.
In a modern world, one where this
ancient language could be obsolete,
[music] Silbo's future looks unusually
bright.
Especially with tourists lining up to
hear it in action.
>> [music]
>> Spain has this knack for contradictions,
taking age-old traditions, the kind that
could feel long gone and forgotten,
managing to make them feel [music]
relevant today.
And nowhere is that more true than my
next stop.
A place with Roman roots and [music] one
of the most visited cities in the world.
Where history draws the crowds, but it's
the reinvention that keeps them coming.
I've headed back [music] to the
mainland.
Like the Canary Islands, Barcelona has
become a Mecca for international
visitors.
And although some residents are a bit
tired of all [music] of the attention,
tourism does bring in 14.5
billion dollars a year, making it a
cornerstone of the city's economy.
But there is a quiet paradox at the
heart of this city, too. Barcelona's
easy charm is built on strict geometric
discipline. So, everyone comes to
Barcelona for Sagrada Familia, for Las
Ramblas, for the whole outdoor cafe
culture thing. But, um, I wanted to come
here for something much more exciting.
>> [music]
>> I wanted to come here for their optimal
urban planning.
This is the district of Eixample, a
distinctive grid of 520 square blocks
spanning almost [music] 8 square
kilometers.
It was designed and built in the
mid-19th century as the city was
undergoing a huge expansion thanks
[music] to the Industrial Revolution.
The man responsible was a Catalonian
civil engineer named Ildefons Cerdà.
So, Ildefons Cerdà is this
massive legend in the world of urban
planning. And it's because he was one of
the first people to think of a city not
just as a collection of buildings, but
from a much more holistic view, where
you're not just
cramming in people, you're actually
thinking about the physical well-being
of the people who will live there. And
to achieve that, he went into some crazy
levels of detail.
So, there were all sorts of things that
he was taking [music] into account. For
starters, he was obsessed with
ventilation. He tried to calculate the
amount of air that one person needed to
breathe and then change the [music] size
of the buildings accordingly. He also
didn't want there to be any road
accidents, so he went through the
records of previous accidents, realized
they often happened on narrow streets,
and so made sure his roads were wide
enough to allow for the free flow of
pedestrians and horse-drawn carriages at
the same time.
Horse-drawn carriages, though, quite
difficult to take them around corners,
and so he included these chamfered edges
that would allow the flow to be as easy
as possible.
Nobody had taken such a meticulous and
mathematical approach to city design
before.
Cerdà even gave his method a name that
is now familiar all over the world,
urbanization.
He believed that this brand new way of
modern city planning could help
transform society, too. But Cerdà also
did something really interesting with
the building as you change from the
bottom to the top. So, on the ground
floor, he imagined this would be where
the shops are, the cafes, the kind of
social spaces. And then above that, in
the next couple of floors where you've
got really high ground ceilings, that's
where all the posh people would live,
the bourgeoisie. And then at the top,
the much smaller floors would be for the
workers.
And that way, everybody would be sharing
the same street. You wouldn't end up
with a city with sort of richer people
here and poorer people over there, or a
residential bit and then a commercial
bit over here.
Cerdà understood that the strength of a
city comes from a mixture of diversity
of use [music] and people all in
together.
I think lots of the stuff that is wrong
>> [music]
>> with modern cities
could be fixed if they thought more like
this.
>> [music]
>> How beautiful this is. Like this wide
space, people are eating, there's like
trees down there.
They had it
150 years ago.
It's really annoying.
Do I actually get quite nerdy about
urban design? Sorry.
>> [laughter]
>> Actually not sorry.
The more time I spend here, the more
Spain starts to come into focus. The
country layers passion onto precision.
It [music] cares deeply about rules and
traditions, and then on top of that,
it's free and laid-back.
Spain is so much more than just being at
odds with itself.
And so for my final destination, I am
looking for something that can show me
all of this on a grand scale.
I'm heading to Tarragona
to see how a quirky folk tradition is
also a huge cultural event drawing
tourists from around the world.
>> [music]
>> These people are castellers, or castle
makers, all heading to take part in a
contest to build giant structures that
you have to see to believe.
Because they are made entirely of human
beings.
I get to spend the day with the team in
turquoise shirts, the hot favorites,
Vilafranca, and grab a word with
building veteran Ignasi. We've been
doing it for the last 200 years.
It's a tradition. It's
something that we do because it's a part
of the Catalan culture that's very
important, very rich.
Ignasi has been practicing for months
to try and build the tallest structure
possible.
Why do you do it? And they answer, "Why
not?"
>> [laughter]
>> Everybody's involved, and everybody
wants to make the the best. Everybody
want to win.
My anticipation has definitely been
piqued.
Here, in the city's former bullring, all
the drama is about to unfold.
The time has come.
I'm joining around 5,000 competitors and
thousands of spectators for the world's
largest human tower building
competition.
There's an immense amount of tension in
the stadium. It's packed, completely
full of people. Along with my team,
Vilafranca in turquoise, there are 11
others taking part in this grueling
competition. It's extraordinary
to see
just that massive range of ages.
But seriously, some of these are quite
old men and women.
Sort of worried whether they're strong
enough.
>> [music]
>> These towers evolved in the 18th century
out of a folk dance,
where the final move was lifting one of
the dancers as high as possible.
And now they've gone big. Oh my
goodness. And [music] in this
competition, there are several rounds of
building with towers judged on height
and difficulty of construction.
Oh my goodness.
>> [applause and music]
>> This is not for the faint hearted.
How is it possible?
Seasoned Vilafranca supporter Emilia
helps me understand. It's not a random
position. Every single individual know
exactly where they have to be placed
according to your shape, your height,
your strength.
See that they they are lines. Oh, yeah.
Exactly.
It's like a snowflake.
You've got all the arms going out in
different directions.
Very straight lines. It's simple
geometry, concentric lines pushing
inwards with equal force, forming a
strong circle.
Every nook and cranny filled to create a
solid [music] base, which can flex and
adjust dynamically.
Is the idea that they're pushing forward
just to give support to the upward
structure? [music] Yeah, to lighten the
main structure. It is like architecture.
It's like a flying buttress in a
cathedral.
>> It's exactly this.
This idea, it's like physics. It's
really organized. It's, let's say, a
science.
>> [music]
>> The upper layers are where things start
to get a bit hairy.
There are now only three people in each
layer. [music]
Scaling heights of over 10 meters,
that's the height of a three-story
building.
With children as young as six in the
crowning layer, who must raise their arm
before the tower is considered complete.
>> [cheering]
[music]
>> As each team succeeds, the pressure
mounts on the others to up the ante
further.
And so Vilafranca is attempting a tower
which has only ever been completed once.
Oh my god.
This is like armpit central.
This tower is so tricky because of the
huge amount [music] of weight the base
must support.
190 people to be exact.
And there's not just one but three
towers topping it off. All supporting
each other with interlocking rings.
>> It's a little bit stressful to be even
being a supporter.
The combined weight of the upper layers
is over 12,000 kg, which is nine
average-sized cars.
Success depends on precision timing.
Fast, but not too fast, which could
destabilize the whole thing.
Oh my god, it's so wobbly.
But just as they get close to finishing,
it all comes to an abrupt halt.
>> [applause]
>> What you guys said to get out of the one
of them? Oh, the girl said.
>> One girl, yeah, one little girl.
She has said, "Okay,
not not the right moment for me. I'm
going down and that's okay.
No one is going to blame her." Yeah.
It's sort of ruined the whole idea of it
being a community thing if you suddenly
turned on anyone who made a mistake.
>> Yeah, exactly. So, that's why never
never.
As the competition moves on, teams are
pushing to achieve ever more
gravity-defying structures.
And it might seem surprising, but
serious injuries are rare.
And one reason is how skillful the
castellers are when a tower collapses.
Their bodies fall in on themselves,
fragmenting the energy.
So, multiple impacts are shared and
absorbed by everyone.
That team bond drives Vilafranca [music]
to attempt that tower again.
>> [music]
[music]
>> All three hands raised makes this
extraordinary achievement a
record-breaking build.
>> [music]
>> It is enough to secure big points and at
the end of the day, the championship
title.
>> [music]
>> It is undoubtedly a glorious victory for
the whole team.
But I'm not sure this is really about
winning.
>> [music]
>> You know, I think there's something
almost medieval about watching this.
You've got these human towers that are
literally being built from bone to the
sound [music] of drums and flutes being
played. And when they go wrong, you've
got little kids falling 10 m from the
sky.
But despite all of that, I have
[laughter] to say I sort of get it.
I mean, these castells are like a
physical demonstration of the strength
of a village. They're a monument to
determination. [music] This is perfect
symbol of local pride and collective
action.
And you know what? What could be more
Spanish [music] than that?
Spain is a country where somehow the
contradictions are what hold it all
together.
>> [cheering]
>> And the whole becomes greater than the
sum of its parts.